# Getting started

The Observable CLI is a Node.js application<!-- and is published to npm as [`@observablehq/cli`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@observablehq/cli)-->. As the name suggests, the CLI lives on the command line; the instructions below are intended to run in your [terminal](https://support.apple.com/guide/terminal/open-or-quit-terminal-apd5265185d-f365-44cb-8b09-71a064a42125/mac). You’ll need to install [Node.js 20.6 or later](https://nodejs.org/) before you can install the CLI.

## Installing

We recommend starting with our default project template <!-- https://github.com/observablehq/create --> which currently requires <!-- either npm or --> Yarn 1.x. If you already have Yarn installed, you can check the version like so:

```sh
yarn --version
```

Otherwise, or if some other version of Yarn is installed, you can install Yarn via npm:

```sh
npm install --global yarn
```

See the [Yarn 1.x installation instructions](https://classic.yarnpkg.com/docs/install) for details.

Once Yarn is installed, you can install `observablehq-create`, our project template. This package won’t be made publicly available until the Observable CLI is released, so the command below uses an access token to download it from our private repo. Please do not share this token with anyone outside the Early Access program.

```sh
yarn global add https://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@github.com/observablehq/create
```

Once installed, create a new project with the following command:

```sh
observablehq-create
```

If Yarn doesn’t install onto your `$PATH`, instead try:

```sh
$(yarn global bin)/observablehq-create
```

After answering a few questions, this command will create a new project folder in the current working directory.

## Project structure

A typical project looks like this:

```
.
├─ docs
│  ├─ .observablehq
│  │  └─ cache
│  ├─ components
│  │  └─ dotmap.js
│  ├─ data
│  │  └─ quakes.csv.ts
│  ├─ quakes.md
│  └─ index.md
├─ .gitignore
├─ README.md
├─ observablehq.config.ts
├─ yarn.lock
└─ package.json
```

#### `docs`

This is the “source root” — where your source files live. It doesn’t have to be named `docs`, but that’s the default; you can change it using the **root** [config option](./config). Pages go here. Each page is a Markdown file. The Observable CLI uses [file-based routing](./routing), which means that the name of the file controls where the page is served. You can create as many pages as you like. Use folders to organize your pages.

#### `docs/.observablehq/cache`

This is where the [data loader](./loaders) cache lives. You don’t typically have to worry about this since it’s autogenerated when the first data loader is referenced. You can `rm -rf docs/.observablehq/cache` to clean the cache and force data loaders to re-run.

#### `docs/.observablehq/deploy.json`

This file is autogenerated. If you deploy your project to the Observable platform, we’ll save some information here to make it easier to redeploy next time.

#### `docs/components`

You can put shared [JavaScript modules](./javascript/imports) anywhere in your source root, but we recommend putting them here. This helps you pull code out of Markdown files and into JavaScript, making it easier to reuse code across pages, write tests and run linters, and even share code with vanilla web applications.

#### `docs/data`

You can put [data loaders](./loaders) or static files anywhere in your source root, but we recommend putting them here.

#### `docs/index.md`

This is the home page for your site. You can have as many additional pages as you’d like, but you should always have a home page, too.

#### `observablehq.config.ts`

This is the [project configuration](./config) file, such as the pages and sections in the sidebar navigation, and the project’s title. The config file can be written in either TypeScript (`.ts`) or JavaScript (`.js`).

## Preview

After you’ve initialized your project, you can start developing locally. In preview mode, the Observable CLI generates HTML pages on-demand as you view a local version of your site in the browser. As you edit files, changes will be instantly reflected in the browser.

To start the preview server:

```sh
yarn dev
```

Then visit <http://127.0.0.1:3000> to preview.

By default, the preview server is only visible to you on your local machine using the loopback address `127.0.0.1`. You can open access to remote connections using <nobr>`--host 0.0.0.0`</nobr>. The preview server runs on port 3000 by default (or the next available port if the former is already in use); you can specify the port with the <nobr>`--port`</nobr> flag.

## Build

When you’re ready to deploy your project, use the `build` command to generate the output root (`dist`). You can then copy the `dist` folder to your static site server.

To generate your static site:

```sh
yarn build
```

You can then use `npx http-server dist` to preview your built site.

## Deploy

If you’d like to host your project on the [Observable platform](https://observablehq.com) and share it securely with your team, use the `deploy` command.

To deploy your project to Observable:

```sh
yarn deploy
```

Once done, the command will print the URL where you can view your project on the Observable Cloud. It will follow this pattern:

```
https://observablehq.com/@<workspace>/<project-slug>
```

## Advanced usage

Here are a few more tips.

### Deploying via GitHub Actions

You can schedule the Observable CLI to build and deploy your project automatically on commit, or on a schedule. We’ll share example source code soon, but please reach out and ask if you have questions on how to setup continuous deployment.

### Installing into an existing project

You can install the CLI as a dependency on an existing project if you don’t want to create a new project using our default template as described above.

```sh
npm install https://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@github.com/observablehq/cli
```

```sh
yarn add https://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@github.com/observablehq/cli
```

You can also install the CLI globally so that the `observable` command is available across projects, but we don’t recommend this approach. By installing the CLI into each project, everyone you work with will use the same version of the CLI.
