---
toc: false
---

<style>

.hero {
  display: flex;
  flex-direction: column;
  align-items: center;
  font-family: var(--sans-serif);
  margin: 4rem 0 8rem;
  text-wrap: balance;
  text-align: center;
}

.hero h1 {
  margin: 2rem 0;
  max-width: none;
  font-size: 14vw;
  font-weight: 900;
  line-height: 1;
  background: linear-gradient(30deg, var(--theme-foreground-focus), currentColor);
  -webkit-background-clip: text;
  -webkit-text-fill-color: transparent;
  background-clip: text;
}

.hero h2 {
  margin: 0;
  max-width: 34em;
  font-size: 20px;
  font-style: initial;
  font-weight: 500;
  line-height: 1.5;
  color: var(--theme-foreground-muted);
}

.hero .observablehq-pre-container {
  margin-top: 4rem;
}

@media (min-width: 640px) {
  .hero h1 {
    font-size: 90px;
  }
}

</style>

<div class="hero">
  <h1>The best dashboards are built with code</h1>
  <h2>Create fast, beautiful data apps, dashboards, and reports from the command line. Write Markdown, JavaScript, SQL, Python, R… and any language you like. Free and open-source.</h2>
  <pre data-copy>npm init @observablehq</pre>
  <a href="./getting-started">Get started<span style="display: inline-block; margin-left: 0.25rem;">→</span></a>
</div>

**Observable Framework** is an [open-source](https://github.com/observablehq/cli) static site generator for data apps, dashboards, reports, and more. Framework includes a preview server for local development, and a command-line interface for automating builds & deploys.

You write simple [Markdown](./markdown) pages — with interactive charts and inputs in [reactive JavaScript](./javascript), and with data snapshots generated by [loaders](./loaders) in _any_ programming language (SQL, Python, R, and more) — and Framework compiles it into a static site with instant page loads for a great user experience. Since everything is just files, you can use your preferred editor and source control, write unit tests, share code with other apps, integrate with CI/CD, and host projects anywhere.

Framework includes thoughtfully-designed [themes and components](./components) to help you build displays of data that look great on any device. And you can quickly craft custom components using open-source libraries such as [Observable Plot](./lib/plot), [D3.js](./lib/d3), [Vega-Lite](./lib/vega-lite), [Graphviz](./lib/graphviz), [Mermaid](./lib/mermaid), [Leaflet](./lib/leaflet), [KaTeX](./lib/tex), and myriad more. (And for working with data, don’t forget about [Arquero](./lib/arquero), [DuckDB](./lib/duckdb), and [SQLite](./lib/sqlite), too.)

Want the best dashboards? [Get started now.](./getting-started)
