# Projects

A typical project looks like this:

```ini
.
├─ docs
│  ├─ .observablehq
│  │  └─ cache
│  ├─ components
│  │  └─ dotmap.js
│  ├─ data
│  │  └─ quakes.csv.ts
│  ├─ quakes.md
│  └─ index.md
├─ .gitignore
├─ README.md
├─ observablehq.config.js
├─ yarn.lock
└─ package.json
```

#### `docs`

This is the “source root” — where your source files live. It doesn’t have to be named `docs`, but that’s the default; you can change it using the **root** [config option](./config). Pages go here. Each page is a Markdown file. Framework uses [file-based routing](./routing), which means that the name of the file controls where the page is served. You can create as many pages as you like. Use folders to organize your pages.

#### `docs/.observablehq/cache`

This is where the [data loader](./loaders) cache lives. You don’t typically have to worry about this since it’s autogenerated when the first data loader is referenced. You can `rm -rf docs/.observablehq/cache` to clean the cache and force data loaders to re-run.

#### `docs/.observablehq/deploy.json`

This file is autogenerated. If you deploy your project to the Observable platform, we’ll save some information here to make it easier to redeploy next time.

#### `docs/components`

You can put shared [JavaScript modules](./imports) anywhere in your source root, but we recommend putting them here. This helps you pull code out of Markdown files and into JavaScript, making it easier to reuse code across pages, write tests and run linters, and even share code with vanilla web applications.

#### `docs/data`

You can put [data loaders](./loaders) or static files anywhere in your source root, but we recommend putting them here.

#### `docs/index.md`

This is the home page for your site. You can have as many additional pages as you’d like, but you should always have a home page, too.

#### `observablehq.config.js`

This is the [project configuration](./config) file, such as the pages and sections in the sidebar navigation, and the project’s title. The config file can be written in either TypeScript (`.ts`) or JavaScript (`.js`).
