# Routing

Observable Framework uses file-based routing: each page in your project has a corresponding [Markdown](./markdown) file (`.md`) of the same name. In addition to pages, you can have [importable](./imports) JavaScript modules (`.js`), [data loaders](./loaders) for generating data snapshots (_e.g._, `.csv.py`), and [static assets](./data#files) such as images and files (_e.g._, `.png`).

A typical project looks like this:

```ini
.
├─ docs
│  ├─ .observablehq
│  │  └─ cache
│  ├─ components
│  │  └─ dotmap.js
│  ├─ data
│  │  └─ quakes.csv.ts
│  ├─ quakes.md
│  └─ index.md
├─ .gitignore
├─ README.md
├─ observablehq.config.js
├─ yarn.lock
└─ package.json
```

#### `docs`

This is the “source root” — where your source files live. It doesn’t have to be named `docs`, but that’s the default; you can change it using the **root** [config option](./config). Pages go here. Each page is a Markdown file. Observable Framework uses [file-based routing](./routing), which means that the name of the file controls where the page is served. You can create as many pages as you like. Use folders to organize your pages.

#### `docs/.observablehq/cache`

This is where the [data loader](./loaders) cache lives. You don’t typically have to worry about this since it’s autogenerated when the first data loader is referenced. You can `rm -rf docs/.observablehq/cache` to clean the cache and force data loaders to re-run.

#### `docs/.observablehq/deploy.json`

This file is autogenerated. If you deploy your project to the Observable platform, we’ll save some information here to make it easier to redeploy next time.

#### `docs/components`

You can put shared [JavaScript modules](./imports) anywhere in your source root, but we recommend putting them here. This helps you pull code out of Markdown files and into JavaScript, making it easier to reuse code across pages, write tests and run linters, and even share code with vanilla web applications.

#### `docs/data`

You can put [data loaders](./loaders) or static files anywhere in your source root, but we recommend putting them here.

#### `docs/index.md`

This is the home page for your site. You can have as many additional pages as you’d like, but you should always have a home page, too.

#### `observablehq.config.js`

This is the [project configuration](./config) file, such as the pages and sections in the sidebar navigation, and the project’s title. The config file can be written in either TypeScript (`.ts`) or JavaScript (`.js`).

## Pages

For example, here’s a simple project that only has two pages (`hello.md` and `index.md`) in the source root (`docs`):

```ini
.
├─ docs
│  ├─ hello.md
│  └─ index.md
└─ ...
```

When the site is built, the output root (`dist`) will contain two corresponding static HTML pages (`hello.html` and `index.html`), along with a few additional assets needed for the site to work.

```ini
.
├─ dist
│  ├─ _observablehq
│  │  └─ ... # additional assets for serving the site
│  ├─ hello.html
│  └─ index.html
└─ ...
```

For this site, routes map to files as:

```
/      → dist/index.html → docs/index.md
/hello → dist/hello.html → docs/hello.md
```

This assumes “clean URLs” as supported by most static site servers; `/hello` can also be accessed as `/hello.html`, and `/` can be accessed as `/index` and `/index.html`. (Some static site servers automatically redirect to clean URLs, but we recommend being consistent when linking to your site.)

Projects should always have a top-level `index.md`; this is the root page of your project, and it’s what people visit by default.

## Folders

Pages can live in folders. For example:

```ini
.
├─ docs
│  ├─ missions
|  |  ├─ index.md
|  |  ├─ apollo.md
│  │  └─ gemini.md
│  └─ index.md
└─ ...
```

With this setup, routes are served as:

```
/                → dist/index.html           → docs/index.md
/missions/       → dist/missions/index.html  → docs/missions/index.md
/missions/apollo → dist/missions/apollo.html → docs/missions/apollo.md
/missions/gemini → dist/missions/gemini.html → docs/missions/gemini.md
```

As a variant of the above structure, you can move the `missions/index.md` up to a `missions.md` in the parent folder:

```ini
.
├─ docs
│  ├─ missions
|  |  ├─ apollo.md
│  │  └─ gemini.md
│  ├─ missions.md
│  └─ index.md
└─ ...
```

Now routes are served as:

```
/                → dist/index.html           → docs/index.md
/missions        → dist/missions.html        → docs/missions.md
/missions/apollo → dist/missions/apollo.html → docs/missions/apollo.md
/missions/gemini → dist/missions/gemini.html → docs/missions/gemini.md
```

## Imports

If you use a static [`import`](./imports) (or a dynamic import with a static string literal as the module specifier) to import a local JavaScript file, the imported module will be copied to the output root (`dist`) during build, too.

For example, if you have the following source root:

```ini
.
├─ docs
│  ├─ chart.js
│  └─ index.md
└─ ...
```

And `index.md` includes a JavaScript code block that says:

```js run=false
import {Chart} from "./chart.js";
```

The resulting output root is:

```ini
.
├─ dist
│  ├─ _import
│  │  └─ chart.c79c2048.js
│  ├─ _observablehq
│  │  └─ ... # additional assets for serving the site
│  └─ index.html
└─ ...
```

The import declaration is automatically rewritten during build to point to `./_import/chart.c79c2048.js` instead of `./chart.js`. The content hash `c79c2048` ensures cache-breaking during deploy, and allows assets to be marked as `cache-control: immutable` to improve performance.

Use a leading slash to denote paths relative to the source root, such as `/chart.js` instead of `./chart.js`. This allows you to use the same path to import a module from anywhere, even in nested folders. Observable Framework always generates relative links so that the generated site can be served under a base path.

## Files

If you use [`FileAttachment`](./data#files), attached files live in the source root (`docs`) alongside your Markdown pages. For example, say `index.md` has some JavaScript code that references `FileAttachment("quakes.csv")`:

```ini
.
├─ docs
│  ├─ index.md
│  └─ quakes.csv
└─ ...
```

Any files referenced by `FileAttachment` will automatically be copied to the `_file` folder under the output root (`dist`), here resulting in:

```ini
.
├─ dist
│  ├─ _file
│  │  └─ quakes.e5f2eb94.csv
│  ├─ _observablehq
│  │  └─ ... # additional assets for serving the site
│  └─ index.html
└─ ...
```

`FileAttachment` references are automatically rewritten during build; for example, a reference to `quakes.csv` might be replaced with `_file/quakes.e5f2eb94.csv`. (As with imports, file names are given a content hash, here `e5f2eb94`, to improve performance.) Only the files you reference statically are copied to the output root (`dist`), so nothing extra or unused is included in the built site.

[Imported modules](#imports) can use `FileAttachment`, too. In this case, the path to the file is _relative to the importing module_ in the same fashion as `import`; this is accomplished by resolving relative paths at runtime with [`import.meta.url`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/import.meta).

Some additional assets are automatically promoted to file attachments and copied to `_file`. For example, if you have a `<link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css">` declared statically in a Markdown page, the `style.css` file will be copied to `_file`, too (and the file name given a content hash). The HTML elements eligible for file attachments are `audio`, `img`, `link`, `picture`, and `video`.

## Data loaders

Files can also be generated at build time by [data loaders](./loaders): arbitrary programs that live alongside Markdown pages and other static files in your source root (`docs`). For example, if you want to generate a `quakes.json` file at build time by fetching and caching data from the USGS, you could write a data loader in a shell script like so:

```ini
.
├─ docs
│  ├─ index.md
│  └─ quakes.json.sh
└─ ...
```

Where `quakes.json.sh` is:

```sh
curl https://earthquake.usgs.gov/earthquakes/feed/v1.0/summary/all_day.geojson
```

This will produce the following output root:

```ini
.
├─ dist
│  ├─ _file
│  │  └─ quakes.99da78d9.json
│  ├─ _observablehq
│  │  └─ ... # additional assets for serving the site
│  └─ index.html
└─ ...
```

See the [data loaders documentation](./loaders#routing) for additional information.

## Archives

File attachments can be also be pulled from archives. The following archive extensions are supported:

- `.zip` - for the [ZIP](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ZIP_(file_format)>) archive format
- `.tar` - for [tarballs](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tar_(computing)>)
- `.tar.gz` and `.tgz` - for [compressed tarballs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gzip)

For example, say you have a `quakes.zip` archive that includes yearly files for observed earthquakes. If you reference `FileAttachment("quakes/2021.csv")`, Framework will pull the `2021.csv` from `quakes.zip`. So this source root:

```ini
.
├─ docs
│  ├─ quakes.zip
│  └─ index.md
└─ ...
```

Becomes this output:

```ini
.
├─ dist
│  ├─ _file
│  │  └─ quakes
│  │     └─ 2021.e5f2eb94.csv
│  ├─ _observablehq
│  │  └─ ... # additional assets for serving the site
│  └─ index.html
└─ ...
```
